# FOCS Homework 20

Edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory. If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Aidan McLaughlin
Check one:
[ ] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[X] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: __Stack Overflow, Wikipedia (clarifications on NP-complete)_
```

## 1. Datalog

a. Consider a dialect of Datalog that includes `not`. [Many implementations include `not`. Racket Catalog does not.] What is value of the query in the following program?

```
likes(amy, susan).
likes(susan, amy).
likes(mark, amy).
unliked(X) :- not likes(Someone, X).
unliked(mark)?
```

Answer: unliked(mark).

b. How about after extending this program with the following fact?

```
likes(amy, mark).
unliked(mark)?
```

Answer: #f

c. Is Datalog NP-Complete?

Answer: My understanding of Datalog is incomplete but based off of what I've seen so far: yes. Although it could get expensive quite quickly based on the definitions of relationships, it appears each individual lookup would be O(n^k) where n is the number of items available in the given relationship and k relates to how many spaces are being solved for. For our earlier example, let's say we look for `unliked(mark)?` before adding an entry for him. We have 1 variable and 3 people defined and thus O(3^1) complexity in checking the possible relationships to mark. When checking various relationships (in an and expression for example) we would add the complexities but I believe they would still all fall under O(n^k).


## 2. SQL

Read about SQL **joins**: inner join, left (outer) join, right (outer) join, and full (outer) join. Here are some explanations of joins:

* [What Is a SQL Join](http://www.sql-join.com) and [Basic SQL Join Types](http://www.sql-join.com/sql-join-types) – Stitch Co.
* [A Visual Explanation of SQL Joins](https://blog.codinghorror.com/a-visual-explanation-of-sql-joins/) – Jeff Atwood

Consider the tables `college` and `town`:

| college_name | students | town_name |
| ------------ | -------- | --------- |
| Babson       | 2840     | Needham   |
| Olin         | 350      | Needham   |
| Wellesley    | 2474     | Wellesley |

| town_name | population | settled_date |
| --------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| Needham   | 28,888     | 1680         |
| Dedham    | 24,729     | 1635         |

What values does each of the following joins select?

 All joins are on the column `town_name` that is present in both tables. (That is, these are **natural joins**.) 

a. An inner join of `college` and `town`.<br>
`SELECT c.college_name, c.town_name FROM college c INNER JOIN town t ON c.town_name = t.town_name;`

| c.college_name | c.town_name |
| --- | --- |
| Babson | Needham |
| Olin   | Needham |

b. A left join of `college` and `town`.<br>
`SELECT c.college_name, c.town_name, t.population FROM college c LEFT JOIN town t ON c.town_name = t.town_name;`

| c.college_name | c.town_name | t.population |
|---|---|---|
| Babson    | Needham   | 28,888 |
| Olin      | Needham   | 28,888 |
| Wellesley | Wellesley | NULL |

c. A right join of `college` and `town`.
`SELECT c.college_name, t.town_name, t.population FROM college c RIGHT JOIN town t ON c.town_name = t.town_name;`

| c.college_name | t.town_name | t.population |
|---|---|---|
| Babson    | Needham   | 28,888 |
| Olin      | Needham   | 28,888 |
| NULL      | Dedham    | 24,729 |

d. A full join of `college` and `town`.
`SELECT c.college_name, c.town_name, t.town_name, t.population FROM college c RIGHT JOIN town t ON c.town_name = t.town_name;`

| c.college_name | c.town_name | t.town_name | t.population |
|---|---|---|---|
| Babson    | Needham   | Needham | 28,888 |
| Olin      | Needham   | Needham | 28,888 |
| Wellesley | Wellesley | NULL    | NULL |
| NULL      | NULL      | Dedham  | 24,729 |


## 3. Prolog

Do chapter 1 of [Learn Prolog Now](http://lpn.swi-prolog.org/lpnpage.php?pageid=online). Note that this is the version with embedded exercises, which is not what a generic search turns up.

You do not have to turn in the exercises in 1.3 (or any others), but those are a good gauge of your understanding.

You are also welcome to download and install [SWI-Prolog](http://www.swi-prolog.org) or [gprolog](http://www.gprolog.org), but these are not required.

## 4. (Optional) Sorting

Using the descriptions of sorting algorithms in the PDF attached to [Day 15](https://sites.google.com/site/focs16fall/in-class-exercises/day-15-sorting-and-friends):

Write out the steps in sorting the following arrays with each of the algorithms.  Specifically, show the state of the array after each pass through the outer loop.  [NB:  you may omit passes that either subdivide or concatenate sub-arrays without changing the order.]

`3 9 4 1 8 3 7 2`


`3 1 2 4 6 5 2 7`


`9 1 8 2 7 6 5 4`


`8 3 4 3 4 8 3 4`
